Cyclists and pedestrians are 15 times more likely to be killed than drivers on UK roads (https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/648081/rrcgb2016-01.pdf). In a society where we’re trying to desperately to promote environmentally friendly modes of transport, we’re instead unwillingly discouraging them with the safety risks. The cyclist safety movement usually focuses on the cyclist, wearing high-visibility clothing and covering bikes with flashing lights. However, these methods are only effective when seen. In a blind spot study, 54.1% of respondents did not know what a blind spot was(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323257581_Awareness_and_Prevalence_of_Vehicle_Blindspot_Issues_among_Lorry_Drivers). Many cyclists get seriously injured or even killed in blind spots, especially when the vehicles are turning, hence for the need of our project; an object detecting blind spot camera that warns both drivers and those at risk in the blind spot.

When a bike or pedestrian enters the blindspot (both identified in code as a “person”), the driver will be notified through an audible tone and text-to-speech message. The pedestrian or bike at risk will be warned through an 8x8 LED matrix hat attached to the Pi, placed in view of the vehicle’s blind spot that will flash a warning when detected, alerting the pedestrian or cyclist of the danger.

Many new/higher end cars are using technology very similar to ours, but they do not classify what objects they are detecting. Newer cars can incidentally warn the driver about things such as shrubbery, as the technology can be very vague.  However, one fatal flaw is the cars are new. Used cars and cheaper cars don’t get such luxuries, however, used cars are the ones more often on the streets, and more often in accidents (https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/811825). This technology is expensive to implement into newer cars, costing around $100-$1000 to install (https://echomaster.com/newsroom/blog/blind-spot-camera-system-faq). We decided to instead focus on helping the people without this built in, so we created a cost-effective, efficient, and simple project, costing around £40. Since it’s universal, it will be able to help avoid all sorts of accidents. Already, motion sensors and blind spot cameras have stopped so many accidents, and we believe our project could help prevent even more by providing an automatic warning to those cyclists and pedestrians in vehicles blind spots, or otherwise dangerous positions (like those on rear-wheel drive vehicles, due to the back end of the vehicle moving first). We aren’t calling our project a replacement to driver awareness, it will instead aid an ever growing issue on our roads. 

The project is open source. Manufacturers and users (or anyone with access to the source code) can use and modify the code as they wish under the MIT licence. This means manufacturers could also modify the LED matrix and maybe even use a screen if wanted.

